renaissance art, painting, sculpture, architecture, music, and literature produced during the 14th, 15th, and 16th centuries in europe under the combined influences of an increased awareness of nature, a revival of classical learning, and a more individualistic view of man. scholars no longer believe that the renaissance marked an abrupt break with medieval values, as is suggested by the french word renaissance, literally “rebirth.” rather, historical sources suggest that interest in nature, humanistic learning, and individualism were already present in the late medieval period and became dominant in 15th- and 16th-century italy concurrently with social and economic changes such as the secularization of daily life, the rise of a rational money-credit economy, and greatly increased social mobility.in italy the renaissance proper was preceded by an important “proto-renaissance” in the late 13th and early 14th centuries, which drew inspiration from franciscan radicalism. st. francis had rejected the formal scholasticismof the prevailing christian theology and gone out among the poor praising the beauties and spiritual value of nature. his example inspired italian artists and poets to take pleasure in the world around them. the most famous artist of the proto-renaissance period, giotto di bondone (1266/67 or 1276–1337), reveals a new pictorial style that depends on clear, simple structure and great psychological penetration rather than on the flat, linear decorativeness and hierarchical compositions of his predecessors and contemporaries, such as the florentine painter cimabue and the siennese painters duccio and simone martini. the great poet dante lived at about the same time as giotto, and his poetry shows a similar concern with inward experience and the subtle shades and variations of human nature. although his divine comedybelongs to the middle ages in its plan and ideas, its subjective spirit and power of expression look forward to the renaissance. petrarch and giovanni boccaccio also belong to this proto-renaissance period, both through their extensive studies of latin literature and through their writings in the vernacular. unfortunately, the terrible plague of 1348 and subsequent civil wars submerged both the revival of humanistic studies and the growing interest in individualism and naturalism revealed in the works of giotto and dante. the spirit of the renaissance did not surface again until the beginning of the 15th century.in 1401 a competition was held at florence to award the commission for bronze doors to be placed on the baptistery of san giovanni. defeated by the goldsmith and painter lorenzo ghiberti, filippo brunelleschi and donatelloleft for rome, where they immersed themselves in the study of ancient architecture and sculpture. when they returned to florence and began to put their knowledge into practice, the rationalized art of the ancient world was reborn. the founder of renaissance painting was masaccio (1404–28). the intellectuality of his conceptions, the monumentality of his compositions, and the high degree of naturalism in his works mark masaccio as a pivotal figure in renaissance painting. the succeeding generation of artists—piero della francesca, pollaiuolo, and andrea del verrocchio—pressed forward with researches into linear and aerial perspective and anatomy, developing a style of scientific naturalism.the situation in florence was uniquely favourable to the arts. the civic pride of florentines found expression in statues of the patron saints commissioned from ghiberti and donatello for niches in the grain-market guildhall known as or san michele, and in the largest dome built since antiquity, placed by brunelleschi on the florence cathedral. the cost of construction and decoration of palaces, churches, and monasteries was underwritten by wealthy merchant families.principal among these were the medici, who dominated florence from 1434, when the first pro-medici government was elected, until 1492, when lorenzo de medici died. during their ascendancy the medici subsidized virtually the entire range of humanistic and artistic activities associated with the renaissance. cosimo (1389–1464), made wealthy by his trading profits as the papal banker, was a scholar who founded the neoplatonic academy and collected an extensive library. he gathered around him the foremost writers and classical scholars of his day, among them marsilio ficino, the neoplatonist who served as the tutor of lorenzo de medici, cosimo’s grandson. lorenzo (1449–92) became the centre of a group of artists, poets, scholars, and musicians who believed in the neoplatonic ideal of a mystical union with god through the contemplation of beauty. less naturalistic and more courtly than the prevailing spirit of the first half of the quattrocento, this aesthetic philosophy was elucidated by giovanni pico della mirandola, incarnated in painting by sandro botticelli, and expressed in poetry by lorenzo himself. lorenzo also collaborated with the organist and choirmaster of the florence cathedral, heinrich isaac, in the composition of lively secular choral music which anticipated the madrigal, a characteristic form of the high renaissance.the medici traded in all of the major cities in europe, and one of the most famous masterpieces of northern renaissance art, the portinari altarpiece, by hugo van der goes (c. 1476; uffizi, florence), was commissioned by their agent, tommaso portinari. instead of being painted with the customary tempera of the period, the work is painted with translucent oil glazes that produce brilliant jewel-like colour and a glossy surface. early northern renaissance painters were more concerned with the detailed reproduction of objects and their symbolic meaning than with the study of scientific perspective and anatomy even after these achievements became widely known. on the other hand, central italian painters began to adopt the oil painting medium soon after the portinari altarpiece was brought to florence in 1476.high renaissance art, which flourished for about 35 years, from the early 1490s to 1527, when rome was sacked by imperial troops, revolves around three towering figures: leonardo da vinci (1452–1519), michelangelo (1475–1564), and raphael (1483–1520). each of the three embodies an important aspect of the period: leonardo was the ultimate renaissance man, a solitary genius to whom no branch of study was foreign; michelangelo emanated creative power, conceiving vast projects that drew for inspiration on the human body as the ultimate vehicle for emotional expression; raphael created works that perfectly expressed the classical spirit—harmonious, beautiful, and serene.although leonardo was recognized in his own time as a great artist, his restless researches into anatomy, the nature of flight, and the structure of plant and animal life left him little time to paint. his fame rests mainly on a few completed paintings; among them are the mona lisa (1503–05, louvre), the virgin of the rocks (1483–86, louvre), and the sadly deteriorated fresco the last supper (1495–98; restored 1978–99; santa maria delle grazie, milan).michelangelo’s early sculpture, such as the pietà (1499; st. peter’s, rome) and the david (1501–04; accademia, florence), reveals a breathtaking technical ability in concert with a disposition to bend rules of anatomy and proportion in the service of greater expressive power. although michelangelo thought of himself first as a sculptor, his best known work is the giant ceiling fresco of the sistine chapel in the vatican, rome. it was completed in four years, from 1508 to 1512, and presents an incredibly complex but philosophically unified composition that fuses traditional christian theology with neoplatonic thought.raphael’s greatest work, school of athens (1508–11), was painted in the vatican at the same time that michelangelo was working on the sistine chapel. in this large fresco raphael brings together representatives of the aristotelian and platonic schools of thought. instead of the densely packed, turbulent surface of michelangelo’s masterpiece, raphael places his groups of calmly conversing philosophers and artists in a vast court with vaults receding into the distance. raphael was initially influenced by leonardo, and he incorporated the pyramidal composition and beautifully modelled faces of the virgin of the rocks into many of his own paintings of the madonna. he differed from leonardo, however, in his prodigious output, his even temperament, and his preference for classical harmony and clarity.the creator of high renaissance architecture was donato bramante (1444–1514), who came to rome in 1499 when he was 55. his first roman masterpiece, the tempietto (1502) at s. pietro in montorio, is a centralized dome structure that recalls classical temple architecture. pope julius ii(reigned 1503–13) chose bramante to be papal architect, and together they devised a plan to replace the 4th-century old st. peter’s with a new church of gigantic dimensions. the project was not completed, however, until long after bramante’s death.humanistic studies continued under the powerful popes of the high renaissance, julius ii and leo x, as did the development of polyphonic music. the sistine choir, which performed at services when the pope officiated, drew musicians and singers from all of italy and northern europe. among the most famous composers who became members were josquin des prez (c. 1450–1521) and giovanni pierluigi da palestrina (c. 1525–94).the renaissance as a unified historical period ended with the fall of rome in 1527. the strains between christian faith and classical humanism led to mannerism in the latter part of the 16th century. great works of art animated by the renaissance spirit, however, continued to be made in northern italy and in northern europe.seemingly unaffected by the mannerist crisis, northern italian painters such as correggio (1494–1534) and titian (1488/90–1576) continued to celebrate both venus and the virgin mary without apparent conflict. the oil medium, introduced to northern italy by antonello da messina and quickly adopted by venetian painters who could not use fresco because of the damp climate, seemed particularly adapted to the sanguine, pleasure-loving culture of venice. a succession of brilliant painters—giovanni bellini, giorgione, titian, tintoretto, and paolo veronese—developed the lyrical venetian painting style that combined pagan subject matter, sensuous handling of colour and paint surface, and a love of extravagant settings. closer in spirit to the more intellectual florentines of the quattrocento was the german painter albrecht dürer (1471–1528), who experimented with optics, studied nature assiduously, and disseminated his powerful synthesis of renaissance and northern gothic styles through the western world by means of his engravings and woodcuts.known as the renaissance, the period immediately following the middle ages in europe saw a great revival of interest in the classical learning and values of ancient greece and rome. against a backdrop of political stability and growing prosperity, the development of new technologies–including the printing press, a new system of astronomy and the discovery and exploration of new continents–was accompanied by a flowering of philosophy, literature and especially art. the style of painting, sculpture and decorative arts identified with the renaissance emerged in italy in the late 14th century; it reached its zenith in the late 15th and early 16th centuries, in the work of italian masters such as leonardo da vinci, michelangelo and raphael. in addition to its expression of classical greco-roman traditions, renaissance art sought to capture the experience of the individual and the beauty and mystery of the natural world.origins of renaissance artthe origins of renaissance art can be traced to italy in the late 13th and early 14th centuries. during this so-called “proto-renaissance” period (1280-1400), italian scholars and artists saw themselves as reawakening to the ideals and achievements of classical roman culture. writers such as petrarch (1304-1374) and giovanni boccaccio (1313-1375) looked back to ancient greece and rome and sought to revive the languages, values and intellectual traditions of those cultures after the long period of stagnation that had followed the fall of the roman empire in the sixth century.did you know?leonardo da vinci, the ultimate "renaissance man," practiced all the visual arts and studied a wide range of topics, including anatomy, geology, botany, hydraulics and flight. his formidable reputation is based on relatively few completed paintings, including "mona lisa," "the virgin of the rocks" and "the last supper."the florentine painter giotto (1267?-1337), the most famous artist of the proto-renaissance, made enormous advances in the technique of representing the human body realistically. his frescoes were said to have decorated cathedrals at assisi, rome, padua, florence and naples, though there has been difficulty attributing such works with certainty.early renaissance art (1401-1490s)in the later 14th century, the proto-renaissance was stifled by plague and war, and its influences did not emerge again until the first years of the next century. in 1401, the sculptor lorenzo ghiberti (c. 1378-1455) won a major competition to design a new set of bronze doors for the baptistery of the cathedral of florence, beating out contemporaries such as the architect filippo brunelleschi (1377-1446) and the young donatello (c. 1386- 1466), who would later emerge as the master of early renaissance sculpture.the other major artist working during this period was the painter masaccio (1401-1428), known for his frescoes of the trinity in the church of santa maria novella (c. 1426) and in the brancacci chapel of the church of santa maria del carmine (c. 1427), both in florence. masaccio painted for less than six years but was highly influential in the early renaissance for the intellectual nature of his work, as well as its degree of naturalism.florence in the renaissancethough the catholic church remained a major patron of the arts during the renaissance–from popes and other prelates to convents, monasteries and other religious organizations–works of art were increasingly commissioned by civil government, courts and wealthy individuals. much of the art produced during the early renaissance was commissioned by the wealthy merchant families of florence, most notably the medici.from 1434 until 1492, when lorenzo de’ medici–known as “the magnificent” for his strong leadership as well as his support of the arts–died, the powerful family presided over a golden age for the city of florence. pushed from power by a republican coalition in 1494, the medici family spent years in exile but returned in 1512 to preside over another flowering of florentine art, including the array of sculptures that now decorates the city’s piazza della signoria.high renaissance art (1490s-1527)by the end of the 15th century, rome had displaced florence as the principal center of renaissance art, reaching a high point under the powerful and ambitious pope leo x (a son of lorenzo de’ medici). three great masters–leonardo da vinci, michelangelo and raphael–dominated the period known as the high renaissance, which lasted roughly from the early 1490s until the sack of rome by the troops of the holy roman emperor charles v of spain in 1527. leonardo (1452-1519) was the ultimate “renaissance man” for the breadth of his intellect, interest and talent and his expression of humanist and classical values. leonardo’s best-known works, including the “mona lisa” (1503-05), “the virgin of the rocks” (1485) and the fresco “the last supper” (1495-98), showcase his unparalleled ability to portray light and shadow, as well as the physical relationship between figures–humans, animals and objects alike–and the landscape around them.michelangelo buonarroti (1475-1564) drew on the human body for inspiration and created works on a vast scale. he was the dominant sculptor of the high renaissance, producing pieces such as the pietà in st. peter’s cathedral (1499) and the david in his native florence (1501-04). he carved the latter by hand from an enormous marble block; the famous statue measures five meters high including its base. though michelangelo considered himself a sculptor first and foremost, he achieved greatness as a painter as well, notably with his giant fresco covering the ceiling of the sistine chapel, completed over four years (1508-12) and depicting various scenes from genesis.raphael sanzio, the youngest of the three great high renaissance masters, learned from both da vinci and michelangelo. his paintings–most notably “the school of athens” (1508-11), painted in the vatican at the same time that michelangelo was working on the sistine chapel–skillfully expressed the classical ideals of beauty, serenity and harmony. among the other great italian artists working during this period were bramante, giorgione, titian and correggio.renaissance art in practicemany works of renaissance art depicted religious images, including subjects such as the virgin mary, or madonna, and were encountered by contemporary audiences of the period in the context of religious rituals. today, they are viewed as great works of art, but at the time they were seen and used mostly as devotional objects. many renaissance works were painted as altarpieces for incorporation into rituals associated with catholic mass and donated by patrons who sponsored the mass itself.renaissance artists came from all strata of society; they usually studied as apprentices before being admitted to a professional guild and working under the tutelage of an older master. far from being starving bohemians, these artists worked on commission and were hired by patrons of the arts because they were steady and reliable. italy’s rising middle class sought to imitate the aristocracy and elevate their own status by purchasing art for their homes. in addition to sacred images, many of these works portrayed domestic themes such as marriage, birth and the everyday life of the family.expansion and declineover the course of the 15th and 16th centuries, the spirit of the renaissance spread throughout italy and into france, northern europe and spain. in venice, artists such as giorgione (1477/78-1510) and titian (1488/90-1576) further developed a method of painting in oil directly on canvas; this technique of oil painting allowed the artist to rework an image­–as fresco painting (on plaster) did not–and it would dominate western art to the present day. oil painting during the renaissance can be traced back even further, however, to the flemish painter jan van eyck (died 1441), who painted a masterful altarpiece in the cathedral at ghent (c. 1432). van eyck was one of the most important artists of the northern renaissance; later masters included the german painters albrecht durer (1471-1528) and hans holbein the younger (1497/98-1543).by the later 1500s, the mannerist style, with its emphasis on artificiality, had developed in opposition to the idealized naturalism of high renaissance art, and mannerism spread from florence and rome to become the dominant style in europe. renaissance art continued to be celebrated, however: the 16th-century florentine artist and art historian giorgio vasari, author of the famous work “lives of the most eminent painters, sculptors and architects” (1550), would write of the high renaissance as the culmination of all italian art, a process that began with giotto in the late 13th century.italian renaissance art & renaissance artiststhe renaissance is a period in europe, from the 14th to the 17th century, regarded as the cultural bridge between the middle ages and modern history. it started as a cultural movement in italy in the late medieval period and later spread to the rest of europe, marking the beginning of the early modern age. the renaissance was a time of re-birth and awakening in europe. the images that emerged from the renaissance continue to represent beauty and intellect for people around the world. there has simply never been a time in history when artists stretched their wings to bring their mediums to such new heights. one can also question if there has ever been an era in history in which so many great thinkers and artists were born. the renaissance birthed the great talents of artists like leonardo da vinci and michelangelo. the first blossoms of the renaissance emerged around the year 1400 a.d. in italy. it rose from the ashes of medieval europe to combine the wonders of antiquity with the modern sensibilities that were emerging in a changing world. beauty, sin, redemption, the sacred and the profane are all represented and celebrated by renaissance art. the period was formed by a perfect storm of change that created a social landscape that was fertile for encouraging artistic expression. there were a number of factors that contributed to this fertile landscape. classical texts that had been lost to european scholars for centuries suddenly become available. everything from poetry and drama to early christian writings served as inspiration for the emerging batch of artists of the day. the wealth of the medici bank in florence also contributed to a strong appreciation for the arts. this grand level of wealth allowed for the funding of the arts in a way that had never existed before. what is relevant about this tidbit is that it allowed wealthy families to fund little-known artists who would have otherwise gone unnoticed. art suddenly became a commodity instead of something that was commissioned only by the church. of course, what people think of most when the renaissance comes to mind is an expansion of thought and a breaking of barriers. this was a time of questioning when it came to one's identity and role in the universe. the overreaching theme that most people take away from the renaissance is a desire among artists to express mankind's placement in regards to nature, the cosmos and god. while most art of the renaissance retained the religious themes of the previous era, it treated the subject differently. the role of art in europe suddenly shifted from merely praising god to pondering his motives and methods. exploring the themes of the renaissance is a satisfying endeavor that can help people in modern times appreciate the beauty and complexity of the era. you are invited to explore the renaissance to discover a rich world that celebrated the body and soul through art, sculpture and literature.renaissance paintingssomething spectacular happened that allowed the painters of the renaissance to bring images to life with a new level of vividness. improvements in the quality of oil paint meant that paintings could really express movement on the canvas. dutch painters like jan van eyck, hans memling, rogier van der weyden, robert campin and hugo van der goes made early innovations that helped to usher in what would become one of the most colorful and splendid eras of art in history. italy was another place that served as a backdrop for the rise of renaissance artists. florentine painters were somewhat obsessed with the idea of how elements of perspective and light should be dealt with in paintings. artist piero della francesca was one of the first painters to transform the way other artists depicted light in their works. in other parts of italy, artists like antonello da messina and andrea mantegna were developing techniques that would influence artists from naples to venice. the renaissance developed in france slightly differently than it did in other parts of europe. cutting-edge artists there tirelessly worked on ways to bring heavenly inspiration to illuminated manuscripts, devotional paintings, altarpieces and portraits for the nobility. the limbourg brothers and jean fouquet stand out as iconic figures of the renaissance in france. the renaissance of northern europe is accurately represented by the way the movement took shape in germany. most historians consider michael pacher to be the first painter to bring elements of the italian renaissance to germany. the paintings of hieronymus bosch introduced a whimsical and grotesquely beautiful style that revolutionized the art world in northern europe. of course, it is impossible to talk about the art of the renaissance without discussing the genius of leonardo da vinci. many people consider leonardo's da vinci's entrance into the era as the start of the high renaissance. no name better seems to symbolize that age than leonardo da vinci. other painters of the high renaissance include giovanni bellini, raphael and michelangelo. michelangelo's famous painting on the ceiling of the sistine chapel is the perfect embodiment of the renaissance's ambitiousness and dramatic styling.renaissance sculpturesthe defiant expressions, stark poses and elegant details that are seen in some of the most iconic renaissance sculptures can awaken the senses and ignite the spirit. unlike the stiff, angled bodies of the byzantine period, renaissance sculptures embraced the softness of the human body. mortality was suddenly favored above piety or perfection when it came to representing both saints and sinners. no other sculptor managed to capture the realism and beauty of the renaissance quite like michelangelo. the work of michelangelo represented the power and vulnerability of the human form in a way that still fascinates the world today. most historians cite the famous competition for the doors of the florence baptistery in 1403 as the beginning of the era of renaissance sculpture. the doors created by lorenzo ghiberti are still standing today. something interesting that happened during this period was that it became popular for sculptures to be commissioned for use in both public spaces and the homes of the wealthy. both busts and full bodies were in favor during the renaissance.renaissance literaturethe written word bounced from the pages in much the same way images came to life on canvases during the renaissance. works from this era were often vivid and haunting. the period is perhaps best summed up by the heavy writings of authors like dante. boccaccio, machiavelli and ariosto are also some of the most notable authors from the period. a love of literature among the people of the day was heightened by gutenberg's invention of the printing press in 1440. people began to read works that were written in the vernacular instead of classical languages. many of the most popular works of the renaissance revolved around man's relationship to god. themes of sin and salvation are woven heavily into the darkly beautiful tales that captured the interest of people throughout europe. another important figure is william shakespeare. shakespeare arguably invented a uniquely english version of the renaissance, for he wove together the plots of ancient tragedies with the histories of medieval england so masterfully that it was difficult to disentangle them. shakespeare's influence on renaissance culture was not simply a matter of incorporating works written in foreign languages and times past into his present. shakespeare is considered the greatest of english writers and one of the most talented creators in history. today he is the most quoted author in the english language. just like isaac newton on physics and charles darwin on natural history, renaissance's impact on art history is tremendous. in addition to its expression of classical greco-roman traditions, renaissance art sought to capture the experience of the individual and the beauty and mystery of the natural world. ultimately, the achievements of renaissance artists rivaled, rather than reproduced, the accomplishments of the ancient past, adding a brilliant modern chapter to the history of the classical tradition.the basics of art: the renaissancevintage man in a museum gallery looking at paintingwe live in a world that’s highly technical and specialized. when a man goes to college these days, he spends his time learning the skills that will allow him to seek gainful employment. little time is spent studying art or literature. these subjects are often seen as “pointless” because they don’t have any practical application when it comes to paying the bills. on top of that, many men see art appreciation as wussy and effeminate and thus steer clear of it.but it’s a shame that many men feel this way about art because they’re missing out on poignant insights about what it means to be human and what it means to be a man. art can capture the emotions of the human experience when words fail us, give us insight into positive madness, expand our minds, and help us learn more about the world and ourselves.if you feel like you missed out on a basic art education or if you learned plenty about art history, but you need a refresher, this series we’re starting today is just for you. over the next few months, we’ll be covering some of the simple basics of the important periods of western art. next time you’re on a date at a museum, you’ll have a few things to add to the conversation. but more importantly, you’ll be able to get more out of the art yourself and hopefully be inspired to delve deeper into the fruits of man’s infinite creativity. as you take time to ponder and mediate on some of history’s greatest works of art, you’ll gain a deeper appreciation for art’s manly heritage, experience uplift and edification, and find yourself closer to becoming a true renaissance man.speaking of the renaissance, let’s get started talking about that period’s art.an introduction to the basics of renaissance arttime period: 1400s-1600sbackground: the 14th century was a time of great crisis; the plague, the hundred years war, and the turmoil in the catholic church all shook people’s faith in government, religion, and their fellow man. in this dark period europeans sought a new start, a cultural rebirth, a renaissance.the renaissance began in italy where the culture was surrounded by the remnants of a once glorious empire. italians rediscovered the writings, philosophy, art, and architecture of the ancient greeks and romans and began to see antiquity as a golden age which held the answers to reinvigorating their society. humanistic education, based on rhetoric, ethics and the liberal arts, was pushed as a way to create well-rounded citizens who could actively participate in the political process. humanists celebrated the mind, beauty, power, and enormous potential of human beings. they believed that people were able to experience god directly and should have a personal, emotional relationship to their faith. god had made the world but humans were able to share in his glory by becoming creators themselves.these new cultural movements gave inspiration to artists, while italy’s trade with europe and asia produced wealth that created a large market for art. prior to the renaissance period, art was largely commissioned by the catholic church, which gave artists strict guidelines about what the finished product was to look like. medieval art was decorative, stylized,  flat, and two-dimensional and did not depict the world or human beings very realistically. but a thriving commercial economy distributed wealth not just to the nobility but to merchants and bankers who were eager to show their status by purchasing works of art (the church remained a large patron of the arts as well). artists were allowed greater flexibility in what they were to produce, and they took advantage of it by exploring new themes and techniques.things to look for in renaissance art:art diagram illustration perspetive horizon lineperspective. to add three-dimensional depth and space to their work, renaissance artists rediscovered and greatly expanded on the ideas of linear perspective, horizon line, and vanishing point.linear perspective: rendering a painting with linear perspective is like looking through a window and painting exactly what you see on the window pane. instead of every object in the picture being the same size, objects that were further away would be smaller, while those closer to you would be larger.horizon line: horizon line refers to the point in the distance where objects become so infinitely small, that they have shrunken to the size of a line.vanishing point: the vanishing point is the point at which parallel lines appear to converge far in the distance, often on the horizon line. this is the effect you can see when standing on railroad tracks and looking at the tracks recede into the distance.shadows and light. artists were interested in playing with the way light hits objects and creates shadows. the shadows and light could be used to draw the viewer’s eye to a particular point in the painting.emotion. renaissance artists wanted the viewer to feel something while looking at their work, to have an emotional experience from it. it was a form of visual rhetoric, where the viewer felt inspired in their faith or encouraged to be a better citizen.realism and naturalism. in addition to perspective, artists sought to make objects, especially people, look more realistic. they studied human anatomy, measuring proportions and seeking the ideal human form. people looked solid and displayed real emotions, allowing the viewer to connect with what the depicted persons were thinking and feeling.examples:let’s start out by looking at two different paintings of the virgin mary, one from the byzantine period, and one from the renaissance period, so that you can get a feel for the profound transformation art went through during the renaissance:madonna and child on a curved throne wood panel paintingmadonna and child on a curved throne, 1200’s. in this wood panel painting from the byzantine period, the bodies of mary and jesus are bodiless and hidden in drapery. the folds of the drapery are represented by gold leaf striations; even where you would see knees, you have an accumulation of gold instead of light and shadow. the picture lacks the feeling of depth and space. also, jesus is portrayed as an infant, but looks like a miniature adult.madonna del cardellino painting by raphael, 1506madonna del cardellino, by raphael, 1506. now we’re well into the renaissance and the changes in style are readily apparent. mary has become much more realistically human; she has a real form, real limbs, a real expression on her face. not only does she look natural, but she is placed is a natural setting. jesus and john the baptist look like real babies, not miniature adults. raphael utilized perspective to give the painting depth. he also captured the renaissance’s love of combining beauty and science-bringing back things like geometry from the ancient greeks: mary, christ, and john the baptist form a pyramid.tribute money painting by masaccio, 1425tribute money, by masaccio, 1425. masaccio was a pioneer in the technique of one point perspective; the painting is an image of what one person looking at the scene would see. notice how peter, next to the water, and the mountains are paler and less clear than the objects in the foreground. the lines in the painting meet atop jesus’ head in a vanishing point. it appears that the figures are lit by light from the chapel, as their shadows all fall away in the same direction. such a touch seems basic to us today, but incorporating a light from a specific source and using it to lend figures three-dimensionality was groundbreaking for the time.the last supper painting by leonardo da vinci, 1498the last supper, by leonardo da vinci, 1498.  an example of the way in which renaissance artists wished to draw the viewer into the painting by depicting a vibrant scene filled with real psychology and emotion. all the apostles have different reactions to christ revealing that one will betray him. like in the tribute money, jesus’ head is located at the vanishing point for all the perspective lines.the creation of adam painting by michelangelo, 1511the creation of adam, by michelangelo, 1511. in this most famous section of the sistine chapel, the personal nature of faith, the divine potential of man, and the idea of man being co-creator with god is vividly depicted. so is the renaissance interest in anatomy; god is resting on the outline of the human brain. michelangelo, like leonardo, performed numerous dissections of human corpses in order to gain an in-depth and realistic look at the parts and structure of the human body.david sculpture by michelangelo, 1504david, by michelangelo, 1504. renaissance artists created the first free-standing nude statutes since the days of antiquity. michelangelo believed that sculpture was the highest form of art as it echoes the process of divine creation. his david is the perfect example of the renaissance’s celebration of the ideal human form. the statue conveys rich realism in form, motion, and feeling. the upper body and hands are not quite proportional, perhaps owing to the fact that the work was meant to be put on a pedestal and viewed by looking upwards. michelangelo was a master at portraying subjects at moments of psychological transition, as if they had just thought of something, and this statue is often believed to be depicting the moment when david decides to slay goliath.school of athens painting by raphael, 1510school of athens, by raphael, 1510. this painting, which depicts all the great philosophers of ancient greece and rome, serves as an example of the way in which renaissance artists were inspired by and hearkened back to the days of antiquity. the perspective lines draw the viewer to the center of the painting and the vanishing point where history’s two greatest philosophers, plato and aristotle, stand. in line with their philosophies, plato points to the heavens and the realm of forms, while aristotle points to the earth and the realm of things.an introduction to italian renaissance art raphael (1483-1520) 'the school of athens', 1509-11 (fresco)raphael (1483-1520)'the school of athens', 1509-11 (fresco)the italian renaissance was a 'rebirth' of classical values in art, literature and philosophy. it was a period of artistic development in western art that stretched from the revival of naturalism in the art of giotto at the end of the 13th century to the expressive forms of mannerism in the art of michelangelo at the start of the 16th century. its influence spread across europe and gave rise to the cultural and scientific ideas that shaped artistic thought for the next five hundred years.the term 'renaissance', which means 'rebirth' in french, was coined in 1855 by jules michelet in his nineteen-volume masterpiece 'histoire de france'. the key elements of italian renaissance art agesander, polydorus, and athenodorus (1st century b.c.) laocoön and his sons, circa 42-20 b.c. (marble)agesander, polydorus, and athenodorus (1st century b.c.)laocoön and his sons, circa 42-20 b.c. (marble)during the 14th century many italians believed that the barbarous cultures of the dark and early middle ages had discarded the high artistic standards set by the ancient romans and greeks. therefore, in order to restore these lost ideals, it was necessary for art to retrace its steps to find a new path to progress. this quest led to a revival of certain artistic principles from the classical era which were merged with contemporary ideas to form the key elements of art during the italian renaissance. among the most important of these were:naturalism: a search for the perfection of form that was inspired by the naturalism of classical sculpture.humanism: the influence of the philosophy of classical humanism which is revealed in the gradual shift from religious to secular subject matter in art.perspective drawing: the development of perspective drawing as the standard means of organizing the spatial depth of a picture.new media and techniques: the development of new media and techniques which were essential to achieve a greater naturalism in art.the development of italian renaissance art can be broken down into four distinct stages - the proto renaissance, the early renaissance, the high renaissance and the venetian renaissance.  the proto renaissance simone martini (c. 1280/85-1344) the annunciation, 1333simone martini (c. 1280/85-1344)the annunciation, 1333 (egg tempera and gold on panel)the proto renaissance is the name given to that uncertain period of transition in italian art as the creative influence of the byzantine tradition began to decline. artists saw the need for a more relevant art form that reflected the aspirations of an ambitious italy, desperate to emerge from the stagnation of its medieval past.during the proto renaissance, there was a gradual development of naturalism in italian art which was inspired by the values of classical humanism and the anatomical beauty of classical sculpture. you can see the start of this process when you compare two paintings by duccio and giotto.duccio di buoninsegna (c.1255-1315) 'maestà' (the virgin in her majesty, surrounded by angels and saints), 1308-11duccio di buoninsegna (c.1255-1315)'maestà' (the virgin in her majesty), 1308-11 (egg tempera and gold on panel)in duccio's 'maestà', the huge altarpiece that he painted for siena cathedral, the artist still has one foot stuck in the flat frontal conventions of byzantine composition. the other tries to free itself through the greater naturalism of the figures, as they turn to focus on the christ child or, in a few distracted cases, on one another. giotto (c.1267-1337) 'the betrayal of christ', 1303-06 (fresco 72"x72") scenes from the life of christ in the arena chapel, padua.giotto (c.1267-1337)'the betrayal of christ', 1303-06 (fresco 72"x72")in giotto's 'betrayal of christ', a scene from his fresco cycle of the life of christ in the arena chapel in padua, the naturalism of his figures and their layered composition is turned up a notch to let the dramatic narrative unfold in a more naturalistic space. the figures have a greater three-dimensional form, more expressive body language and eye contact, with a particular focus on the revealing look between jesus and judas, just at the moment of his betrayal.the main artists associated with the proto renaissance are:giotto di bondonne (c.1267-1337) - florenceduccio di buoninsegna (c.1255/60-1319) - siennasimone martini (1284-1344) - siennaambrogio lorenzetti (c.1290-1352) - siennapietro lorenzetti (c.1280-1348) - sienna  the early renaissance 'the tribute money', c.1424-27 (fresco)masaccio (1401-28) 'the tribute money', c.1424-27 (fresco)flipmasaccio (1401-28)'the tribute money', c.1424-27 (fresco) click the icon to view perspective study.the early renaissance is mainly associated with the city of florence as the birthplace of the movement and as its main centre of artistic innovation. early renaissance art introduces a greater degree of naturalism by placing an emphasis on the observational drawing of the human figure. it also establishes a more precise spatial organization of the figures, buildings and landscapes through the invention of perspective drawing. paolo uccello (1397-1475) left panel: 'battle of san romano', c.1438-40 (egg tempera on poplar panel)paolo uccello (1397-1475)left panel: 'battle of san romano', c.1438-40 (egg tempera on poplar panel)humanistic subject matter, based on the study of classical mythology, along with portraiture and landscape evolved as acceptable subjects for art during the early renaissance. this marks a shift from the exclusive position held by religious art.some artists, for example masaccio, fra angelico and piero della francesca, followed in the footsteps of giotto by increasing the degree of naturalism in painting within the traditional themes of christian art. others, such as paolo uccello and sandro botticelli, advanced the same aesthetic ideals by using secular subjects to reflect the historical and classical interests of their wealthy patrons. the main artists associated with the early renaissance are:masaccio (1401-28) -florencedonatello (1386-1466) - florencefra angelico (1387-1455) - florencepaulo uccello (1397-1475) -florencefra filippo lippi (c.1406-69) - florencepiero della francesca (1416-92) - umbriaandrea mantegna (1430-1506) - padua, mantuasandro botticelli (1445-1510) - florence, romepietro perugino (1450-1523) - umbria  the high renaissance leonardo da vinci (1452-1519) 'mona lisa', c.1503-06 (oil on panel)leonardo da vinci 1452-1519)'mona lisa', c.1503-06 (oil on panel)the high renaissance relocated to rome which became the cultural capital of the movement under the generous patronage of successive popes. giorgio vasari writes about this period (which he calls the 'third manner') as the highest peak of artistic achievement in which renaissance art reached an unsurpassed level of grandeur. some individual artists and their patrons also gained recognition for their local regions in central italy through the creation of significant artworks. 'the transfiguration', 1480raphael sanzio (1483-1520) 'the transfiguration', 1480flipraphael sanzio (1483-1520)'the transfiguration', 1516-20 (egg tempera on a poplar panel)click on the flip icon to view the composition structure.the path to realism in art reached its peak in the sixteenth century with leonardo, michelangelo and raphael who achieved the classical ideals that artists had pursued since the proto-renaissance. the general character of this art was classical and intellectual in its concept, focusing on ideas relating to the structure, form, proportion and the arrangement of figures within a formally balanced composition. michelangelo buonarroti (1475-1564) 'the last judgement', 1536-41 (fresco)michelangelo buonarroti (1475-1564)'the last judgement', 1535-41 (fresco)although these three great masters have come to personify the art of the high renaissance, each offers a unique character in their art that reflects their individual personality:the intense observation, invention and psychological insights of leonardo.the graceful proportions, harmony and atmosphere in the paintings of raphael.the heroic power and form of the human figure in michelangelo. the main artists associated with the high renaissance are:leonardo da vinci (1452 -1519) - florence, milan, francemichelangelo buonarroti (1475-1564) - florence, romeraffaello sanzio (1483-1520) - umbria, romefra bartolommeo (1472-1517) - florencedosso dossi (c.1474/79-1542) - ferraraandrea del sarto (1486-1530) – florenceantonio allegri correggio (1489-1534) – parma  the venetian renaissance giorgione (1477-1510) 'the castelfranco madonna', c. 1503-04 (oil on panel)giorgione (1477-1510)'the castelfranco madonna', c. 1503-05 (oil on panel)the venetian renaissance gave rise to a different character of art with a stronger emphasis on color, pattern and atmosphere.during the 15th century, venice was the most prosperous city in italy due to its favorable location on the adriatic sea for trade with the vast byzantine empire to the east. it was a cosmopolitan port that traded in timber, exotic spices, luxuriant lace and silks, islamic porcelain and metalwork, and colorful minerals and dyes. the city was built on a group of small islands separated by canals whose shimmering reflections illuminate the area with a special quality of light. this peculiar blend of economic, cultural and topographical conditions combined to inspire paintings with a more vibrant use of color.while artists from florence and rome were more concerned about using the rational elements of line, shape and form to construct an ordered vision that reflected their classical mindset, venetian artists more naturally engaged with the sensually charged elements of color and light to create an atmospheric reflection of their world. giovanni bellini (1430-1516) 'saint francis in ecstasy', c.1480 (oil on panel) giovanni bellini (1430-1516)'saint francis in ecstasy', c.1475-80 (oil on panel)the artist responsible for transforming painting in venice was giovanni bellini. he experimented with the new technique of oil painting to create radiant images whose atmosphere was modelled with luminous color and delicate tone. his stunning landscape backgrounds rank among the greatest in the history of art. titian (1489-1576) 'bacchus and ariadne', 1520–23 (oil on canvas) titian (1489-1576)'bacchus and ariadne', 1520–23 (oil on canvas)giorgione (giorgio barbarelli) and titian (tiziano vecelli), both students of bellini, took up their master's mantle developing the atmospheric and expressive qualities of oil paint. when bellini died, titian went on to become the supreme master of the venetian renaissance, excelling in every genre with a style of spontaneous brushwork in his later paintings that unshackled painting technique for future generations of artists. tintoretto (1518-94) 'ariadne, venus and bacchus', 1576 (oil on canvas)tintoretto (1518-94)'ariadne, venus and bacchus', c.1576 (oil on canvas)the last master of the venetian renaissance was tintoretto (jacopo robusti). his weightless figures, angular perspectives, dramatic lighting and vigorous brushwork create a uniquely personal vision of his subjects which, although criticized in his own time for their unorthodox technique, are appreciated today for their individuality and freedom of expression. the main artists associated with the venetian renaissance are:giovanni bellini (1430-1516) - venicegiorgione (1476-1510) - venicetitian (1487-1576) - venice, rometintoretto (1518-94) - venice  italian renaissance notes leonardo da vinci (1452-1519) 'the last supper', 1495-98 (tempera on gesso)leonardo da vinci (1452-1519)'the last supper', 1495-98 (tempera on gesso)the italian renaissance was the 'rebirth' of classical values in art that influenced artistic thought for the next five hundred years.the key elements that formed the art of the italian renaissance were naturalism, classical humanism, perspective drawing and the development of oil painting.the main painting techniques of italian renaissance art were fresco for large scale murals and tempera for smaller panel paintings, which was later superceded by the greater versatility of oil paints.the four main stages of the italian renaissance were the proto renaissance, the early renaissance, the high renaissance and the venetian renaissance.the proto renaissance is the name given to the period of transition in italian art as byzantine art began to decline and a more naturalistic style evolved.the early renaissance introduced perspective drawing and a greater naturalism to the drawing of the human figure.the high renaissance achieved the classical ideals that artists had pursued since the proto-renaissance.the venetian renaissance produced a more colorful atmospheric style of painting that reflected the vibrant cultural character of the region.renaissance art in italy (c.1400-1600)history, characteristics, causes, techniquesduring the two hundred years between 1400 and 1600, europe witnessed an astonishing revival of drawing, fine art painting, sculpture and architecture centred on italy, which we now refer to as the renaissance (rinascimento). it was given this name (french for 'rebirth') as a result of la renaissance - a famous volume of history written by the historian jules michelet (1798-1874) in 1855 - and was better understood after the publication in 1860 of the landmark book "the civilization of the renaissance in italy" (die kultur der renaissance in italien), by jacob burckhardt (1818-97), professor of art history at the university of basel.what were the characteristics of the renaissance?in very simple terms, the italian renaissance re-established western art according to the principles of classical greek art, especially greek sculpture and painting, which provided much of the basis for the grand tour, and which remained unchallenged until pablo picasso and cubism.from the early 14th century, in their search for a new set of artistic values and a response to the courtly international gothic style, italian artists and thinkers became inspired by the ideas and forms of ancient greece and rome. this was perfectly in tune with their desire to create a universal, even noble, form of art which could express the new and more confident mood of the times.renaissance philosophy of humanismabove all, renaissance art was driven by the new notion of "humanism," a philosophy which had been the foundation for many of the achievements (eg. democracy) of pagan ancient greece. humanism downplayed religious and secular dogma and instead attached the greatest importance to the dignity and worth of the individual.effect of humanism on artin the visual arts, humanism stood for (1) the emergence of the individual figure, in place of stereotyped, or symbolic figures. (2) greater realism and consequent attention to detail, as reflected in the development of linear perspective and the increasing realism of human faces and bodies; this new approach helps to explain why classical sculpture was so revered, and why byzantine art fell out of fashion. (3) an emphasis on and promotion of virtuous action: an approach echoed by the leading art theorist of the renaissance leon battista alberti (1404-72) when he declared, "happiness cannot be gained without good works and just and righteous deeds".the promotion of virtuous action reflected the growing idea that man, not fate or god, controlled human destiny, and was a key reason why history painting (that is, pictures with uplifting 'messages') became regarded as the highest form of painting. of course, the exploration of virtue in the visual arts also involved an examination of vice and human evil.causes of the renaissancewhat caused this rebirth of the visual arts is still unclear. although europe had emerged from the dark ages under charlemagne (c.800), and had seen the resurgence of the christian church with its 12th/13th-century gothic style building program, the 14th century in europe witnessed several catastrophic harvests, the black death (1346), and a continuing war between england and france. hardly ideal conditions for an outburst of creativity, let alone a sustained rinascita of paintings, drawings, sculptures and new buildings. moreover, the church - the biggest patron of the arts - was racked with disagreements about spiritual and secular issues.increased prosperityhowever, more positive currents were also evident. in italy, venice and genoa had grown rich on trade with the orient, while florence was a centre of wool, silk and jewellery art, and was home to the fabulous wealth of the cultured and art-conscious medici family.prosperity was also coming to northern europe, as evidenced by the establishment in germany of the hanseatic league of cities. this increasing wealth provided the financial support for a growing number of commissions of large public and private art projects, while the trade routes upon which it was based greatly assisted the spread of ideas and thus contributed to the growth of the movement across the continent.allied to this spread of ideas, which incidentally speeded up significantly with the invention of printing, there was an undoubted sense of impatience at the slow progress of change. after a thousand years of cultural and intellectual starvation, europe (and especially italy) was anxious for a re-birth.weakness of the churchparadoxically, the weak position of the church gave added momentum to the renaissance. first, it allowed the spread of humanism - which in bygone eras would have been strongly resisted; second, it prompted later popes like pope julius ii (1503-13) to spend extravagantly on architecture, sculpture and painting in rome and in the vatican (eg. see vatican museums, notably the sistine chapel frescoes) - in order to recapture their lost influence. their response to the reformation (c.1520) - known as the counter reformation, a particularly doctrinal type of christian art - continued this process to the end of the sixteenth century.an age of explorationthe renaissance era in art history parallels the onset of the great western age of discovery, during which appeared a general desire to explore all aspects of nature and the world. european naval explorers discovered new sea routes, new continents and established new colonies. in the same way, european architects, sculptors and painters demonstrated their own desire for new methods and knowledge. according to the italian painter, architect, and renaissance commentator giorgio vasari (1511-74), it was not merely the growing respect for the art of classical antiquity that drove the renaissance, but also a growing desire to study and imitate nature.why did the renaissance start in italy?in addition to its status as the richest trading nation with both europe and the orient, italy was blessed with a huge repository of classical ruins and artifacts. examples of roman architecture were found in almost every town and city, and roman sculpture, including copies of lost sculptures from ancient greece, had been familiar for centuries. in addition, the decline of constantinople - the capital of the byzantine empire - caused many greek scholars to emigrate to italy, bringing with them important texts and knowledge of classical greek civilization. all these factors help explain why the renaissance started in italy. for more, see florentine renaissance (1400-90).in northern europe, the renaissance was characterized by advances in the representation of light though space and its reflection from different surfaces; and (most visibly) in the achievement of supreme realism in easel-portraiture and still life. this was due in part to the fact that most northern renaissance artists began using oil paint in the early 15th century, in preference to temperaor fresco which (due to climatic and other reasons) were still the preferred painting methods in italy. oil painting allowed richer colour and, due to its longer drying time, could be reworked for many weeks, permitting the achievement of finer detail and greater realism. oils quickly spread to italy: first to venice, whose damp climate was less suited to tempera, then florence and rome. (see also: art movements, periods, schools, for a brief guide to other styles.)among other things, this meant that while christianity remained the dominant theme or subject for most visual art of the period, evangelists, apostles and members of the holy family were depicted as real people, in real-life postures and poses, expressing real emotions. at the same time, there was greater use of stories from classical mythology - showing, for example, icons like venus the goddess of love - to illustrate the message of humanism. for more about this, see: famous paintings analyzed.as far as plastic art was concerned, italian renaissance sculpture reflected the primacy of the human figure, notably the male nude. both donatello and michelangelo relied heavily on the human body, but used it neither as a vehicle for restless gothic energy nor for static classic nobility, but for deeper spiritual meaning. two of the greatest renaissance sculptures were: david by donatello (1440-43, bargello, florence) and david by michelangelo (1501-4, academy of arts gallery, florence). note: for artists and styles inspired by the arts of classical antiquity, see: classicism in art (800 onwards).raised status of painters and sculptorsup until the renaissance, painters and sculptors had been considered merely as skilled workers, not unlike talented interior decorators. however, in keeping with its aim of producing thoughtful, classical art, the italian renaissance raised the professions of painting and sculpture to a new level. in the process, prime importance was placed on 'disegno' - an italian word whose literal meaning is 'drawing' but whose sense incorporates the 'whole design' of a work of art - rather than 'colorito', the technique of applying coloured paints/pigments. disegno constituted the intellectual component of painting and sculpture, which now became the profession of thinking-artists not decorators. see also: best renaissance drawings.influence on western artthe ideas and achievements of both early and high renaissance artists had a huge impact on the painters and sculptors who followed during the cinquecentoand later, beginning with the fontainebleau school (c.1528-1610) in france. renaissance art theory was officially taken up and promulgated (alas too rigidly) by all the official academies of art across europe, including, notably, the accademia di san luca in rome, the accademia del disegno in florence, the french académie des beaux-arts in paris, and the royal academy in london. this theoretical approach, known as 'academic art' regulared numerous aspects of fine art. for example, in 1669, andre felibien, secretary to the french academy, annunciated a hierarchy of painting genres, modelled on renaissance philosophy, as follows: (1) history painting; (2) portrait art; (3) genre painting; (4) landscape; (5) still life.in short, the main contribution of the italian renaissance to the history of art, lay in its promotion of classical greek values. as a result, western painting and sculpture developed largely along classical lines. and although modern artists, from picasso onwards, have explored new media and art-forms, the main model for western art remains greek antiquity as interpreted by the renaissance.renaissance chronologyit is customary to classify italian renaissance art into a number of different but overlapping periods:• the proto-renaissance period (1300-1400)----- pre-renaissance painting (1300-1400)• the early renaissance period (1400-1490)• the high renaissance period (1490-1530)• the northern renaissance (1430-1580)----- netherlandish renaissance (1430-1580)----- german renaissance (1430-1580)• the mannerism period (1530-1600)[the high renaissance developed into mannerism, about the time rome was sacked in 1527.]this chronology largely follows the account given in the authoritative book "vite de' più eccellenti architetti, pittori, et scultori italiani" by the renaissance commentator giorgio vasari (1511-74). 	history of renaissance artthe renaissance, or rinascimento, was largely fostered by the post-feudal growth of the independent city, like that found in italy and the southern netherlands. grown wealthy through commerce and industry, these cities typically had a democratic organization of guilds, though political democracy was kept at bay usually by some rich and powerful individual or family. good examples include 15th century florence - the focus of italian renaissance art - and bruges - one of the centres of flemish painting. they were twin pillars of european trade and finance. art and as a result decorative craft flourished: in the flemish city under the patronage of the dukes of burgundy, the wealthy merchant class and the church; in florence under that of the wealthy medici family.in this congenial atmosphere, painters took an increasing interest in the representation of the visible world instead of being confined to that exclusive concern with the spirituality of religion that could only be given visual form in symbols and rigid conventions. the change, sanctioned by the tastes and liberal attitude of patrons (including sophisticated churchmen) is already apparent in gothic painting of the later middle ages, and culminates in what is known as the international gothic style of the fourteenth century and the beginning of the fifteenth. throughout europe in france, flanders, germany, italy and spain, painters, freed from monastic disciplines, displayed the main characteristics of this style in the stronger narrative interest of their religious paintings, the effort to give more humanity of sentiment and appearance to the madonna and other revered images, more individual character to portraiture in general and to introduce details of landscape, animal and bird life that the painter-monk of an earlier day would have thought all too mundane. these, it may be said, were characteristics also of renaissance painting, but a vital difference appeared early in the fifteenth century. such representatives of the international gothic as simone martini (1285-1344) of the sienese school of painting, and the umbrian-born gentile da fabriano (c.1370-1427), were still ruled by the idea of making an elegant surface design with a bright, unrealistic pattern of colour. the realistic aim of a succeeding generation involved the radical step of penetrating through the surface to give a new sense of space, recession and three-dimensional form.this decisive advance in realism first appeared about the same time in italy and the netherlands, more specifically in the work of masaccio (1401-28) at florence, and of jan van eyck (c.1390-1441) at bruges. masaccio, who was said by delacroix to have brought about the greatest revolution that painting had ever known, gave a new impulse to early renaissance painting in his frescoes in the brancacci chapel of santa maria del carmine.see in particular: expulsion from the garden of eden (1425-6, brancacci chapel), and holy trinity (1428, santa maria novella).the figures in these narrative compositions seemed to stand and move in ambient space; they were modelled with something of a sculptor's feeling for three dimensions, while gesture and expression were varied in a way that established not only the different characters of the persons depicted, but also their interrelation. in this respect he anticipated the special study of leonardo in the last supper (1495-98, convent of santa maria delle grazie, milan).though van eyck also created a new sense of space and vista, there is an obvious difference between his work and that of masaccio which also illuminates the distinction between the remarkable flemish school of the fifteenth century and the italian early renaissance. both were admired as equally 'modern' but they were distinct in medium and idea. italy had a long tradition of mural painting in fresco, which in itself made for a certain largeness of style, whereas the netherlandish painter, working in an oil medium on panel paintings of relatively small size, retained some of the minuteness of the miniature painter. masaccio, indeed, was not a lone innovator but one who developed the fresco narrative tradition of his great proto-renaissance forerunner in florence, giotto di bondone (1267-1337). see, for instance, the latter's scrovegni chapel frescoes (c.1303-10, padua).florence had a different orientation also as a centre of classical learning and philosophic study. the city's intellectual vigour made it the principal seat of the renaissance in the fifteenth century and was an influence felt in every art. scholars who devoted themselves to the study and translation of classical texts, both latin and greek, were the tutors in wealthy and noble households that came to share their literary enthusiasm. this in turn created the desire for pictorial versions of ancient history and legend. the painter's range of subject was greatly extended in consequence and he now had further problems of representation to solve.in this way, what might have been simply a nostalgia for the past and a retrograde step in art became a move forward and an exciting process of discovery. the human body, so long excluded from fine art painting and medieval sculpture by religious scruple - except in the most meagre and unrealistic form - gained a new importance in the portrayal of the gods, goddesses and heroes of classical myth. painters had to become reacquainted with anatomy, to understand the relation of bone and muscle, the dynamics of movement. in the picture now treated as a stage instead of a flat plane, it was necessary to explore and make use of the science of linear perspective. in addition, the example of classical sculpture was an incentive to combine naturalism with an ideal of perfect proportion and physical beauty.painters and sculptors in their own fashion asserted the dignity of man as the humanist philosophers did, and evinced the same thirst for knowledge. extraordinary indeed is the list of great florentine artists of the fifteenth century and, not least extraordinary, the number of them that practised more than one art or form of expression.in every way the remarkable medici family fostered the intellectual climate and the developments in the arts that made florence the mainspring of the renaissance. the fortune derived from the banking house founded by giovanni de' medici (c.1360-1429), with sixteen branches in the cities of europe, was expended on this promotion of culture, especially by the two most distinguished members of the family, cosimo, giovanni's son (1389-1464), and his grandson lorenzo (1448-92), who in their own gifts as men of finance, politics and diplomacy, their love of books, their generous patronage of the living and their appreciation of antiques of many kinds, were typical of the universality that was so much in the spirit of the renaissance.the equation of the philosophy of plato and christian doctrine in the academy instituted by cosimo de' medici seems to have sanctioned the division of a painter's activity, as so often happened, between the religious and the pagan subject. the intellectual atmosphere the medici created was an invigorating element that caused florence to outdistance neighbouring siena. though no other italian city of the fifteenth century could claim such a constellation of genius in art, those that came nearest to florence were the cities likewise administered by enlightened patrons. ludovico gonzaga ( 1414-78) marquess of mantua, was a typical renaissance ruler in his aptitude for politics and diplomacy, in his encouragement of humanist learning and in the cultivated taste that led him to form a great art collection and to employ andrea mantegna (1431-1506) as court painter.of similar calibre was federigo montefeltro, duke of urbino. like ludovico gonzaga, he had been a pupil of the celebrated humanist teacher, vittorino da feltre, whose school at mantua combined manly exercises with the study of greek and latin authors and inculcated the humanist belief in the all-round improvement possible to man. at the court of urbino, which set the standard of good manners and accomplishment described by baldassare castiglione in il cortigiano, the duke entertained a number of painters, principal among them the great piero della francesca (1420-92).the story of renaissance painting after masaccio brings us first to the pious fra angelico (c.1400-55), born earlier but living much longer. something of the gothic style remains in his work but the conventual innocence, which is perhaps what first strikes the eye, is accompanied by a mature firmness of line and sense of structure. this is evident in such paintings of his later years as the adoration of the magi now in the louvre and the frescoes illustrating the lives of st. stephen and st. lawrence, frescoed in the vatican for pope nicholas v in the late 1440s. they show him to have been aware of, and able to turn to advantage, the changing and broadening attitude of his time. see also his series of paintings on the annunciation (c.1450, san marco museum). his pupil benozzo gozzoli (c.1421-97) nevertheless kept to the gaily decorative colour and detailed incident of the international gothic style in such a work as the panoramic procession of the magi in the palazzo riccardi, florence, in which he introduced the equestrian portrait of lorenzo de' medici.nearer to fra angelico than masaccio was fra filippo lippi (c.1406-69), a carmelite monk in early life and a protege of cosimo de' medici, who looked indulgently on the artist's various escapades, amorous and otherwise. fra filippo, in the religious subjects he painted exclusively, both in fresco and panel, shows the tendency to celebrate the charm of an idealized human type that contrasts with the urge of the fifteenth century towards technical innovation. he is less distinctive in purely aesthetic or intellectual quality than in his portrayal of the madonna as an essentially feminine being. his idealized model, who was slender of contour, dark-eyed and with raised eyebrows, slightly retrousse nose and small mouth, provided an iconographical pattern for others. a certain wistfulness of expression was perhaps transmitted to his pupil, sandro botticelli (1445-1510).in botticelli's paintings, much of the foregoing development of the renaissance is summed up. he excelled in that grace of feature and form that fra filippo had aimed to give and of which botticelli's contemporary, domenico ghirlandaio (1449-94), also had his delightful version in frescoes and portraits. he interpreted in a unique pictorial fashion the neo-platonism of lorenzo de medici's humanist philosophers. the network of ingenious allegory in which marsilio ficino, the tutor of lorenzo di pierfrancesco de' medici (a cousin of lorenzo the magnificent), sought to demonstrate a relation between grace, beauty and faith, has equivalent subtlety in la primavera (c.1482-3, uffizi) and the birth of venus (c.1484-6, uffizi) executed for lorenzo's villa. the poetic approach to the classics of angelo poliziano, also a tutor of the medici family, may be seen reflected in botticelli's art. though his span of life extended into the period of the high renaissance, he still represents the youth of the movement in his delight in clear colours and exquisite natural detail. perhaps in the wistful beauty of his aphrodite something may be found of the nostalgia for the middle ages towards which, eventually, when the fundamentalist monk savonarola denounced the medici and all their works, he made his passionate gesture of return.the nostalgia as well as the purity of botticelli's linear design, as yet unaffected by emphasis on light and shade, made him the especial object of pre-raphaelite admiration in the nineteenth century. but, as in other renaissance artists, there was an energy in him that imparted to his linear rhythms a capacity for intense emotional expression as well as a gentle refinement. the distance of the renaissance from the inexpressive calm of the classical period as represented by statues of venus or apollo, resides in this difference of spirit or intention even if unconsciously revealed. the expression of physical energy which at florence took the form, naturally enough, of representations of male nudes, gives an unclassical violence to the work of the painter and sculptor antonio pollaiuolo (1426-98). pollaiuolo was one of the first artists to dissect human bodies in order to follow exactly the play of bone, muscle and tendon in the living organism, with such dynamic effects as appear in the muscular tensions of struggle in his bronze of hercules and antaeus (florence, bargello) and the movements of the archers in his painting the martyrdom of st. sebastian (ng, london). the same sculptural emphasis can be seen in frescoes by the lesser-known but more influential artist andrea del castagno (c.1420-57).luca signorelli (c.1441-1523), though associated with the umbrian school as the pupil of piero della francesca, was strongly influenced by the florentine pollaiuolo in his treatment of the figure. with less anatomical subtlety but with greater emphasis on outward bulges and striations of muscle and sinew, he too aimed at dynamic effects of movement, obtaining them by sudden explosions of gesture.it was a direction of effort that seems to lead naturally and inevitably to the achievement of michelangelo (1475-1654). though there are manifest differences in mode of thought and style between his last lodgement in the sistine chapel and signorelli's version in the frescoes in orvieto cathedral, they have in common a formidable energy. it was a quality which made them appear remote from the balance and harmony of classical art. raphael (1483-1520) was much nearer to the classical spirit in the apollo of his parnassus in the vatican and the galatea in the farnesina, rome. one of the most striking of the regional contrasts of the renaissance period is between the basically austere and intellectual character of art in tuscany in the rendering of the figure as compared with the sensuous languor of the female nudes painted in venice by giorgione (1477-1510) and titian (c.1485-1576). (for more, please see: venetian portrait painting c.1400-1600.) though even in this respect florentine science was not without its influence. the soft gradation of shadow devised by leonardo da vinci to give subtleties of modelling was adopted by giorgione and at parma by antonio allegri da correggio (1489-1534) as a means of heightening the voluptuous charm of a venus, an antiope or an io.the renaissance masters not only made a special study of anatomy but also of perspective, mathematical proportion and, in general, the science of space. the desire of the period for knowledge may partly account for this abstract pursuit, but it held more specific origins and reasons. linear perspective was firstly the study of architects in drawings and reconstructions of the classical types of building they sought to revive. in this respect, the great architect filippo brunelleschi (1377-1446) was a leader in his researches in rome. in florence he gave a demonstration of perspective in a drawing of the piazza of san giovanni that awakened the interest of other artists, his friend masaccio in particular. the architect leon battista alberti (1404-72) was another propagator of the scientific theory. painters concerned with a picture as a three-dimensional illusion realized the importance of perspective as a contribution to the effect of space - an issue which involved techniques of illusionistic mural painting such as quadratura, first practised by mantegna at the ducal palace in mantua in his camera degli sposi frescoes (1465-74).paolo uccello (1397-1475) was one of the earl promoters of the science at florence. his painting of the battle of san romano in the national gallery, london, with its picturesqueness of heraldry, is a beautifully calculated series of geometric forms and mathematical intervals. even the broken lances on the ground seem so arranged as to lead the eye to a vanishing point. his foreshortening of a knight prone on the ground was an exercise of skill that andrea mantegna was to emulate. it was mantegna who brought the new science of art to venice.in the complex interchange of abstract and mathematical ideas and influences, piero della francesca stands out as the greatest personality. though an umbrian, born in the little town of borgo san sepolcro, he imbibed the atmosphere of florence and florentine art as a young man, when he worked there with the venetian-born domenico veneziano (c.1410-61). domenico had assimilated the tuscan style and had his own example of perspective to give, as in the beautiful annunciation now in the fitzwilliam museum, cambridge, though piero probably gained his scientific attitude towards design from the three pioneers of research, brunelleschi, alberti and donatello (1386-1466), the greatest sculptor in quattrocento florence.classical in ordered design and largeness of conception, but without the touch of antiquarianism that is to be found in mantegna, piero was an influence on many painters. his interior perspectives of renaissance architecture which added an element of geometrical abstraction to his figure compositions were well taken note of by his florentine contemporary, andrea del castagno(c.1420-57). a rigidly geometrical setting is at variance with and yet emphasizes the flexibility of human expression in the apostles in andrea's masterpiece the last supper in the convent of sant' apollonia, florence. antonello da messina (1430-1479) who introduced the flemish technique of oil painting to venice brought also a sense of form derived from piero della francesca that in turn was stimulating in its influence on giovanni bellini(1430-1516), diverting him from a hard linear style like that of mantegna and contributing to his mature greatness as leader of venetian painting, and the teacher of giorgione and titian.of the whole wonderful development of the italian renaissance in the fifteenth century, leonardo da vinci and michelangelo were the heirs. the universalityof the artist was one crucial aspect of the century. between architect, sculptor, painter, craftsman and man of letters there had been no rigid distinction. alberti was architect, sculptor, painter, musician, and writer of treatises on the theory of the arts. andrea del verrocchio (1435-88), an early master of leonardo, is described as a goldsmith, painter, sculptor and musician: and in sculpture could vie with any master. but leonardo and michelangelodisplayed this universality to a supreme degree. leonardo, the engineer, the prophetic inventor, the learned student of nature in every aspect, the painter of haunting masterpieces, has never failed to excite wonder. see, for instance, his virgin of the rocks (1483-5, louvre, paris) and lady with an ermine (1490, czartoryski museum, krakow). as much may be said of michelangelo, the sculptor, painter, architect and poet. the crown of florentine achievement, they also mark the decline of the city's greatness. rome, restored to splendour by ambitious popes after long decay, claimed michelangelo, together with raphael, to produce the monumental conceptions of high renaissance painting: two absolute masterpieces being michelangelo's genesis fresco(1508-12, sistine chapel ceiling, rome), which includes the famous creation of adam (1511-12), and raffaello sanzio's sistine madonna (1513-14, gemaldegalerie alte meister, dresden). in addition, both artists were appointed architect-in-charge of the new st peter's basilica in rome, a symbol of the city's transformation from medieval to renaissance city. leonardo, absorbed in his researches was finally lured away to france. yet in these great men the genius of florence lived on. for the story of the late renaissance, during the period (c.1530-1600) - a period which includes the greatest venetian altarpieces as well as michelangelo's magnificent but foreboding last judgment fresco on the altar wall of the sistine chapel - see: mannerist painting in italy. see also: titian and venetian colour painting c.1500-76.renaissance art is the painting, sculpture and decorative arts of the period of european history , emerging as a distinct style in italy in about 1400, in parallel with developments which occurred in philosophy, literature, music, and science. renaissance art, perceived as the noblest of ancient traditions, took as its foundation the art of classical antiquity, but transformed that tradition by absorbing recent developments in the art of northern europe and by applying contemporary scientific knowledge. renaissance art, with renaissance humanist philosophy, spread throughout europe, affecting both artists and their patrons with the development of new techniques and new artistic sensibilities. renaissance art marks the transition of europe from the medieval period to the early modern age.sandro botticelli, the birth of venus, c. 1485. uffizi, florencein many parts of europe, early renaissance art was created in parallel with late medieval art.the influences upon the development of renaissance men and women in the early 15th century are those that also affected philosophy, literature, architecture, theology, science, government, and other aspects of society. the following list presents a summary, dealt with more fully in the main articles that are cited above.classical texts, lost to european scholars for centuries, became available. these included philosophy, prose, poetry, drama, science, a thesis on the arts, and early christian theology.simultaneously, europe gained access to advanced mathematics which had its provenance in the works of islamic scholars.the advent of movable type printing in the 15th century meant that ideas could be disseminated easily, and an increasing number of books were written for a broad public.the establishment of the medici bank and the subsequent trade it generated brought unprecedented wealth to a single italian city, florence.cosimo de' medici set a new standard for patronage of the arts, not associated with the church or monarchy.humanist philosophy meant that man's relationship with humanity, the universe and with god was no longer the exclusive province of the church.a revived interest in the classics brought about the first archaeological study of roman remains by the architect brunelleschi and sculptor donatello. the revival of a style of architecture based on classical precedents inspired a corresponding classicism in painting and sculpture, which manifested itself as early as the 1420s in the paintings of masaccio and uccello.the improvement of oil paint and developments in oil-painting technique by dutch artists such as jan van eyck, rogier van der weyden and hugo van der goes led to its adoption in italy from about 1475 and had ultimately lasting effects on painting practices, worldwide.the serendipitous presence within the region of florence in the early 15th century of certain individuals of artistic genius, most notably masaccio, brunelleschi, ghiberti, piero della francesca, donatello and michelozzo formed an ethos out of which sprang the great masters of the high renaissance, as well as supporting and encouraging many lesser artists to achieve work of extraordinary quality.[1]a similar heritage of artistic achievement occurred in venice through the talented bellini family, their influential in-law mantegna, giorgione, titian and tintoretto.[1][2][3]the publication of two treatises by leone battista alberti, de pitura (on painting), 1435, and de re aedificatoria (ten books on architecture), 1452.historyproto-renaissance in italy, 1280–1400 square fresco. in a shallow space like a stage set, lifelike figures gather around the dead body of jesus. all are mourning. mary magdalene weeps over his feet. a male disciple throws out his arms in despair. joseph of arimethea holds the shroud. in heaven, small angels are shrieking and tearing their hair.giotto: the lamentation, c. 1305, scrovegni chapel, foreshadows the renaissance.main article: italian renaissance paintingin italy in the late 13th and early 14th centuries, the sculpture of nicola pisano and his son giovanni pisano, working at pisa, siena and pistoia shows markedly classicising tendencies, probably influenced by the familiarity of these artists with ancient roman sarcophagi. their masterpieces are the pulpits of the baptistery and cathedral of pisa.contemporary with giovanni pisano, the florentine painter giotto developed a manner of figurative painting that was unprecedentedly naturalistic, three-dimensional, lifelike and classicist, when compared with that of his contemporaries and teacher cimabue. giotto, whose greatest work is the cycle of the life of christ at the arena chapel in padua, was seen by the 16th century biographer giorgio vasari as "rescuing and restoring art" from the "crude, traditional, byzantine style" prevalent in italy in the 13th century.early netherlandish art, 1400–1525main article: early netherlandish paintingrogier van der weyden, the descent from the cross (c. 1435), oil on oak panel, 220 cm × 262 cm (87 in × 103 in). museo del prado, madridthe painters of the low countries at this period included jan van eyck, his brother hubert van eyck, robert campin, hans memling, rogier van der weyden and hugo van der goes. their painting developed independently of early italian renaissance painting, and without the influence of a deliberate and conscious striving to revive antiquity. the style of painting grew directly out of the medieval arts of tempera painting, stained glass and book illumination. the media used was oil paint, which had long been utilised for painting leather ceremonial shields and accoutrements, because it was flexible and relatively durable. the earliest netherlandish oil paintings are meticulous and detailed like tempera paintings. the material lent itself to the depiction of tonal variations and texture, so facilitating the observation of nature in great detail.the netherlandish painters did not approach the creation of a picture through a framework of linear perspective and correct proportion. they maintained a medieval view of hierarchical proportion and religious symbolism, while delighting in a realistic treatment of material elements, both natural and man-made. jan van eyck, with his brother hubert painted the altarpiece of the mystical lamb. it is probable that antonello da messina became familiar with van eyck's work, while in naples or sicily. in 1475, hugo van der goes' portinari altarpiece arrived in florence where it was to have a profound influence on many painters, most immediately domenico ghirlandaio who painted an altarpiece imitating its elements.early renaissance in italy, 1400–1479donatello, david (1440s?) museo nazionale del bargello.main article: italian renaissance paintingalthough both the pisanos and giotto had students and followers, the first truly renaissance artists were not to emerge in florence until 1401 with the competition to sculpt a set of bronze doors of the baptistery of florence cathedral which drew entries from seven young sculptors including brunelleschi, donatello and the winner, lorenzo ghiberti. brunelleschi, most famous as the architect of the dome of florence cathedral and the church of san lorenzo, created a number of sculptural works, including a lifesized crucifix in santa maria novella, renowned for its naturalism. his studies of perspective are thought to have influenced the painter masaccio. donatello became renowned as the greatest sculptor of the early renaissance, his masterpieces being his humanist and unusually erotic statue of david, one of the icons of the florentine republic, and his great monument to gattamelata, the first large equestrian bronze to be created since roman times.the contemporary of donatello, masaccio, was the painterly descendant of giotto, furthering the trend towards solidity of form and naturalism of face and gesture that he had begun a century earlier. masaccio completed several panel paintings but is best known for the fresco cycle that he began in the brancacci chapel with the older artist masolino and which had profound influence on later painters, including michelangelo. masaccio's developments were carried forward in the paintings of fra angelico, particularly in his frescos at the convent of san marco in florence.the treatment of the elements of perspective and light in painting was of particular concern to 15th-century florentine painters. uccello was so obsessed with trying to achieve an appearance of perspective that, according to vasari, it disturbed his sleep. his solutions can be seen in his masterpiece, the battle of san romano. piero della francesca made systematic and scientific studies of both light and linear perspective, the results of which can be seen in his fresco cycle of the history of the true cross in san francesco, arezzo.in naples, the painter antonello da messina began using oil paints for portraits and religious paintings at a date that preceded other italian painters, possibly about 1450. he carried this technique north and influenced the painters of venice. one of the most significant painters of northern italy was andrea mantegna, who decorated the interior of a room, the camera degli sposi for his patron ludovico gonzaga, setting portraits of the family and court into an illusionistic architectural space.the end of the early renaissance in italian art is marked, like its beginning, by a particular commission that drew artists together, this time in cooperation rather than competition. pope sixtus iv had rebuilt the papal chapel, named the sistine chapel in his honour, and commissioned a group of artists, sandro botticelli, pietro perugino, domenico ghirlandaio and cosimo rosselli to decorate its wall with fresco cycles depicting the life of christ and the life of moses. in the sixteen large paintings, the artists, although each working in his individual style, agreed on principals of format, and utilised the techniques of lighting, linear and atmospheric perspective, anatomy, foreshortening and characterisation that had been carried to a high point in the large florentine studios of ghiberti, verrocchio, ghirlandaio and perugino.early renaissance in france, 1375–1528the artists of france, (including duchies such as burgundy) were often associated with courts, providing illuminated manuscripts and portraits for the nobility as well as devotional paintings and altarpieces. among the most famous were the limbourg brothers, flemish illuminators and creators of the très riches heures du duc de berry. jean fouquet, painter of the royal court, visited italy in 1437 and reflects the influence of florentine painters such as paolo uccello. although best known for his portraits such as that of charles vii of france fouquet also created illuminations, and is thought to be the inventor of the portrait miniature. there were a number of artists at this date who painted famed altarpieces, that are stylistically quite distinct from both the italian and the flemish. these include two enigmatic figures, enguerrand quarton to whom is ascribed the pieta of villeneuve-lès-avignon, and jean hey, otherwise known as "the master of moulins" after his most famous work, the moulins altarpiece. in these works realism and close observation of the human figure, emotions and lighting are combined with a medieval formality, which includes gilt backgrounds.high renaissance in italy, 1475–1525[main article: high renaissancemichelangelo, (c. 1511) the creation of adam, from the sistine chapel ceilingthe "universal genius" leonardo da vinci was to further perfect the aspects of pictorial art (lighting, linear and atmospheric perspective, anatomy, foreshortening and characterisation) that had preoccupied artists of the early renaissance, in a lifetime of studying and meticulously recording his observations of the natural world. his adoption of oil paint as his primary media meant that he could depict light and its effects on the landscape and objects more naturally and with greater dramatic effect than had ever been done before, as demonstrated in the mona lisa. his dissection of cadavers carried forward the understanding of skeletal and muscular anatomy, as seen in the unfinished st jerome. his depiction of human emotion in the last supper set the benchmark for religious painting.the art of leonardo's younger contemporary michelangelo took a very different direction. michelangelo, in neither his painting nor his sculpture demonstrates any interest in the observation of any natural object except the human body. he perfected his technique in depicting it, while in his early twenties, by the creation of the enormous marble statue of david and the group the pieta, in st peter's basilica, rome. he then set about an exploration of the expressive possibilities of the human anatomy. his commission by pope julius ii to paint the sistine chapel ceiling resulted in the supreme masterpiece of figurative composition, which was to have profound effect on every subsequent generation of european artists.standing alongside leonardo and michelangelo as the third great painter of the high renaissance was the younger raphael, who in a short life span painted a great number of lifelike and engaging portraits, including those of pope julius ii and his successor pope leo x, and numerous portrayals of the madonna and christ child, including the sistine madonna.in northern italy the high renaissance represented by the religious paintings of giovanni bellini which include several large altarpieces of a type known as "sacred conversation" which show a group of saints around the enthroned madonna. his contemporary giorgione left a small number of enigmatic works, including the tempest, the subject of which has remained a matter of speculation. the earliest works of titian date from the era of the high renaissance, including a massive altarpiece the assumption of the virgin which combines human action and drama with spectacular colour and atmosphere.german renaissance artlucas cranach the elder, apollo and diana.main article: german renaissancegerman renaissance art falls into the broader category of the renaissance in northern europe, also known as the northern renaissance. renaissance influences began to appear in german art in the 15th century, but this trend was not widespread. gardner's art through the ages identifies michael pacher, a painter and sculptor, as the first german artist whose work begins to show italian renaissance influences. according to that source, pacher's painting, st. wolfgang forces the devil to hold his prayerbook (c.1481), is late gothic in style, but also shows the influence of the italian artist, mantegna.[4] artisans, such as engravers, became more concerned with aesthetics rather than just perfecting their craft. germany had master engravers, such as martin schongauer, who did metal engravings in the late 1400s. gardner relates this mastery of the graphic arts to advances in printing which occurred in germany, and says that metal engraving began to replace the woodcut during the renaissance.[5] however, some artists, such as albrecht dürer, continued to do woodcuts. both gardner and russell describe the fine quality of dürer's woodcuts, with russell stating, in the world of dürer, that dürer "elevated them into high works of art."[6]in the 1500s, renaissance art in germany became more common as, according to gardner, "the art of northern europe during the sixteenth century is characterized by a sudden awareness of the advances made by the italian renaissance and by a desire to assimilate this new style as rapidly as possible."[7] one of the best known practitioners of german renaissance art was albrecht dürer (1471–1528). dürer's fascination with classical ideas led him to italy to study art. both gardner and russell recognized the importance of durer's contribution to german art in bringing italian renaissance styles and ideas to germany.[6][8] russell calls this "opening the gothic windows of german art,"[6] while gardner calls it dürer's "life mission."[8] importantly, as gardner points out, dürer "was the first northern artist who fully understood the basic aims of the southern renaissance,"[8] although his style did not always reflect that. the same source says that hans holbein the younger (1497–1543) successfully assimilated italian ideas while also keeping "northern traditions of close realism."[9] this is contrasted against dürer's tendency to work in "his own native german style"[8] instead of combining german and italian styles. other important artists of the german renaissance were grünewald, albrecht altdorfer, and lucas cranach the elder.[10]hieronymus bosch was a painter of the netherlands, who employed the type of fanciful forms that were often utilized to decorate borders and letters in illuminated manuscripts, combining plant and animal forms with architectonic ones. when taken from the context of the illumination and peopled with humans, these forms give bosch's paintings a surreal quality which have no parallel in the work of any other renaissance painter. his masterpiece is the triptych the garden of earthly delights.britainbritain was very late to late to develop a renaissance style and most artists of the tudor court were imported foreigners, usually from the low countries, including hans holbein the younger, who died in england. one exception was the portrait miniature, which artists including nicholas hilliard developed into a distinct genre, well before it became popular in the rest of europe. renaissance art in scotland was similarly dependent on imported artists, and largely restricted to the court.themes and symbolismsandro botticelli, magnificat madonna, 1480–81, tempera on panel, uffizi, florencerenaissance artists painted a wide variety of themes. religious altarpieces, fresco cycles, and small works for private devotion were very popular. for inspiration, painters in both italy and northern europe frequently turned to jacobus de voragine's golden legend (1260), a highly influential source book for the lives of saints that had already had a strong influence on medieval artists. the rebirth of classical antiquity and renaissance humanism also resulted in many mythological and history paintings. ovidian stories, for example, were very popular. decorative ornament, often used in painted architectural elements, was especially influenced by classical roman motifs.techniquesthe use of proportion – the first major treatment of the painting as a window into space appeared in the work of giotto di bondone, at the beginning of the 14th century. true linear perspective was formalized later, by filippo brunelleschi and leon battista alberti. in addition to giving a more realistic presentation of art, it moved renaissance painters into composing more paintings.foreshortening – the term foreshortening refers to the artistic effect of shortening lines in a drawing so as to create an illusion of depth.sfumato – the term sfumato was coined by italian renaissance artist, leonardo da vinci, and refers to a fine art painting technique of blurring or softening of sharp outlines by subtle and gradual blending of one tone into another through the use of thin glazes to give the illusion of depth or three-dimensionality. this stems from the italian word sfumare meaning to evaporate or to fade out. the latin origin is fumare, to smoke.chiaroscuro – the term chiaroscuro refers to the fine art painting modeling effect of using a strong contrast between light and dark to give the illusion of depth or three-dimensionality. this comes from the italian words meaning light (chiaro) and dark (scuro), a technique which came into wide use in the baroque period. 